---
title: "Address Space"
date: 2018-06-24T23:54:04
categories:
- Things I Learned
tags:
- System
---

## The Address Space ##
The address space is the abstraction that OS is providing to the running program. The address space of a process contains
all of the memory state of the running program. For example, the code of the program, the stack and the heap. In the sight
of the program, it loaded into at a particular address and has a potentially very large address space, thus, we say that
the OS is _virtualizing memory_.
<!-- more -->

The major goal of a virtual memory(VM) system is transparency. The OS should implement virtual memory in a way that is 
invisible to the running program. Another goal of VM is efficiency, the OS should strive to make the virtualization as
efficient as possible, both in terms of time and space. Finally, a third VM goal is protection.

In running a C program, there are two types of memory that are allocated. The first is called stack memory, and allocations
and deallocations of it are managed implicitly by the compiler, for this reason it is sometimes called _automatic_ memory.
The second type of memory, called heap memory, where all allocations and deallocations are explicitly handled by the programmer.

## Address Translation ##
With address translation, the hardware transforms each memory access, changing the virtual address provided by the instruction
to a physical address where the desired information is actually located. Thus, on each and every memory reference, an 
address translation is performed by the hardware to redirect application memory reference to their actual locations in 
memory. Of cause, the hardware alone cannot virtualize memory, as it jsut provides the low-level mechanism for doing so
efficiently. The OS must get involved at key points to set up the hardware so that the correct translations take place,
it must thus manage memory, keeping track of which locations are free and which are in use. Once again, the goal of all 
of this work is to create a beautiful illusion: that the program has its own private memory, where its own code and data
reside. While behind the virtual reality lies the ugly physical truth: that many programs are actually sharing memory at
the same time, as the CPU switchs between running one program and the next.

### Segmentation ###
The first hardware-based address translation is a simple idea referred to as base and bounds. Specifically, we'll need
two hardware registers within each CPU: one is called the __base__ register, and the other the __bounds__(sometimes called
a __limit__ register). When a program starts running, the OS decides where in physical memory it should be loaded and sets
the base register to that value. Thus, when any memory reference is generated by the process, it is translated by the 
processor in the following manner:
```
physical address = virtual address + base
```
And the bounds register is there to help with protection, specifically, the processor will first check that the memory
reference is within bounds to make sure it is legal.

It's clear to see that the simple approach of using a base and bounds register pair to virtualize memory is wasteful, 
because there may have a lot of free space between the stack and the heap. To solve this problem, the idea of segmentation
was born, instead of having just one base and bounds pair in our MMU(_memory manage unit_), we just have a base and bounds
pair per logical segment of the address space. A segment is just a contiguous portion of the address space of a particular
length. To refer which which segment is used, one common approach is adding explicit bit to the address bits to refer which
segment is used. For example, if we have the address 1011010101, the top two bit 10 refers to the third segment and the
rest refers to the offset. And if we want to spoort backwards-growed memory reference, such as stack, we could add an extra
support, the hardware need to know which way the segment grows. And to support sharing, we need to add more information
about which segment can be read and write or execute. 

However, segmentation raises a number of new issues. The first is what should the OS do on a context switch, the OS must 
make sure to set up the base and bounds registers correctly before letting the process run again. The second and more 
important issue is managing free space in physical memory, called _external fragmentation_, the problem grows when many
segments was allocated and each segment might be a different size. Thus the physical memory quickly becomes full of little
holes of free space, making it difficult to allocate new segment or to grow existing ones.

### Paging ###
The segmentation chops things up into _variabled-sized_ pieces, unfortunately, the space itselt can become fragmented under
this solution. Thus the second approach chopping things into _fixed-sized_ pieces may be worth considering, which is called
paging. In this view, the physical memory like an array of fixed-sized slots called page frames. With a full-developed 
paging approach, the system will be able to support the abstraction of an address space effectively, regardless of how a
process uses the address space. Also, paging simplifies free-space management, the OS only need to know which page are free. 

To record where each virtual page of the address space is placed in physical memory, the OS usually keeps a per-process
data structure known as a page table. The major role of the page table is to store address translations for each of the 
virtual pages of the address space. It is important that the page table is a __per-process__ structures, this means that
different processes have different page table.
